okay this book is this is a book review
of tripping over the truth here's the
book tripping over the truth by Travis
Christopherson it's a good book I
actually think you know I've heard a
whole bunch of books about cancer I
think this is one of the best ones he
does a very good job of explaining the
reasons to support the
um
metabolic theory of cancer and I think
that's a really important thing the most
important thing you could understand
starting out about cancer is the
metabolic theory of cancer makes a lot
of sense and it's supported by tons of
data I personally agree with him I think
the somatic mutation theory is bogus and
that's relevant because the somatic
mutation theory is the one that is
recommended by most textbooks and by
most old-fashioned conventional thinkers
on cancer but I think it leads you
nowhere uh versus once you understand
the metabolic theory of cancer it gives
you all kinds of ideas what you can do
to help yourself and I think it's
scientifically correct based on
everything I've read
um so oh first of all what this lied
about is here as I previously talked
about how when you have platelet
activation from psychological stress or
for other reasons the platelets can coat
cancer cells around their outer surface
these little tiny purple
circles are the platelets and they're
interacting with the outer surface of
these cells these cancer cells and the
point being is when the immune system
comes by to check for cancer cells the
platelets coating the outer surface of
the cell will interact with the immune
system cell and they will hide the
cancer cells so to speak so here's the
WBC white blood cell saying what's going
on here and the platelet cells oh it's
okay he's with us and they're hiding the
cancer cells so the immune system says
okay Move Along move along and the point
being is uh the platelets are messing
things up and that's one of the problems
why stress is bad for cancer caffeine
bad for cancer sleep deprivation all
that stuff
okay now I'm going to show you what I
think is one of the coolest best slides
of this whole talk and one of the best
things you could ever know about cancer
why does it happen and you know the old
mutations Theory I think it's so bogus
it's ridiculous
and what I mean by that is pretty much
almost all cancer cells have this
particular change in their DNA
transcription so a new protein is being
made called hexokinase II hexokinase II
and that's opposed to hexokinase one so
hexo means six kinase means to add a
phosphate and what basically happens is
imagine your regular cell a regular
human cell and you're making your energy
from oxygen oxidative phosphorylation in
the mitochondria you can make tons of
ATP you can make like 36 atps from that
per glucose versus with anaerobic
glycolysis you only make two
so what happens is when there's hypoxia
lack of oxygen going to the cell it's as
if the main electrical generator uh
Electric Supply is shut down so the
mitochondria says it sends an emergency
message to the the nucleus hey I cannot
produce energy here you're going to have
to switch on the backup generators which
means run more glycolysis and so that
tells the nucleus make more of the
enzymes for the glycolytic pathway in
particular switch over to making hk2 so
instead of hexokinase one is normal
glycolysis hk2 is unique in that it
binds to the mitochondria and not only
binds to the mitochondria right here's
our hk2 it also binds to v-dec which is
a voltage dependent anion Channel and
more importantly that stabilizes the
mitochondrial memory because a lot of
cells when they're hypoxic they say oh
oh can't make energy time to die let's
recycle ourselves and save these
molecules for the rest of the body
rather than uh undergo necrosis necrosis
means a sudden death of a cell that's
unprogrammed whereby it's plasma
membrane lysis and its inner contents
are Spilled Out into the X extracellular
Matrix and that leads to a big
inflammatory reaction and those
chemicals are lost they're destroyed so
it's better for the human body as a
multicellular organism to recycle it
cells when they die gradually from
partial hypoxia rather than sudden
massive hypoxia like with a big stroke
with a big clot embolus blocking an
artery causing complete loss of oxygen
versus partial loss of oxygen okay so
what I'm basically saying here this is a
crucial point
you're not seeing some individual
mutation that's all bogus what you're
seeing is the cell is making a a
decision to switch from aerobic
metabolism to anaerobic metabolism and
in so doing it amplifies the production
of a whole bunch of enzymes that go with
anaerobic metabolism so it's not a
single thing it's a big transformation
of the cell all right and the cell says
previously I was part of a multicellular
organ system part of a kidney along a
liver
um but now I'm on my own I don't got
enough oxygen to do all the stuff they
need a liver cell to do you know to
detox things to manage blood glucose to
make bile screw it you guys are on your
own goodbye I am just going to multiply
as much as I can or anaerobically and
then I'm going to move out of here find
a new apartment somewhere else and in so
doing it's as if the cell made a
conscious decision to transform itself
into functioning like an anaerobic
bacteria and this is the key thing
that's present in virtually all cancer
cells hexokinase II
and and you and a cancer cell will suck
up a hundred times as much glucose as a
regular cell
and then also it will attach the vdac to
stabilize mitochondria remember this is
essential thing to understand this comes
from this paper by the way emerging
glycolysis targeting by this guy down
here uh Dr Shen so anyways this is this
is Big Stuff in cancer getting this is
big stuff and hardly anyone knows this
that's why I'm showing it to you and
putting it right at the beginning of the
talk
that this is it hexokinase II is the
mutation it is the big one it is the
most important one it is the big thing
that happens in cancer okay
now getting back to the varberg effect
means hypoxia inducing a cell to
transform itself into becoming cancer we
talked about how a lot of things
contribute to hypoxia regular old blood
flow red blood cells here traveling
through a capillary the spindle-shaped
cells are the uh endothelial cells this
is the capillary basement membrane and
normally they can pass oxygen through it
quite easily going to let's say a neuron
here or some other cell in the body
versus with chronic diabetes chronic
hypertension the capillary basement
membrane becomes thick and when the
capillary basement membrane is thick I
got less blue circles going up to the
cell the tissue because less oxygen can
get through it so this is a contributor
to oxygen deficiency in the tissue and
other things that will contribute to
this high fat diet less oxygen gets
delivered to the tissue sodium
vasoconstricts Narrows the arteries less
oxygen gets to the tissues
all these things cause hypoxia hypoxia
can lead a cell to transform itself into
functioning like an anaerobic bacteria
and that is called the varberg effect
or actually I think I wanted to show you
this other cell this is just something
I've shown you before that red blood
cells about seven microns in diameter
capillaries about five microns in
diameter so it has to deform to get
through there when you eat a high fat
diet you get real low formation
especially from the LDL cholesterol you
get to generalize blood sludge effect
from the other lipids as well
but this causes rbcs to stick together
so it's harder for them to get through
the capillary blood pressure has to go
up and you get this whole Cascade of
negative events when you eat high fat
food
and this was a study done in the past by
Peter quo he's a cardiologist in
Pennsylvania and he found that if he fed
patients a high fat meal typically this
would be like with saturated fat the
lipids start being significantly
elevated about three hours Peak at about
five hours not significantly down until
at least seven hours and right at this
time he did it with a whole bunch of
patients with known cardiac Angina
meaning coronary artery narrowing that
was symptomatic and right at Peak
glyphemy they checked their blood lipids
every 30 minutes that's when they would
get their chest pain so it correlated
perfectly
um so that's my point you're inducing
hypoxia in your heart getting chest pain
you're inducing hypoxia everywhere else
in the body transient hypoxia the body
can handle it relatively well but
chronic recurrent persistent prolonged
hypoxia the body does not handle that
well
um and fireberg only had to do it for a
couple of hours I don't know the exact
number of hours but it was less than a
day of of ongoing hypoxia
to cause um transformation of cells into
cancer and
also this is with sat fat you know
saturated fat like animal food fat but
if you used
omega-6 cooking oils it was worse quotes
lab in um Ray rosenmann and Meyer Meyer
Friedman They got prolonged duration of
uh blood sludge and relative hypoxia
from omega-6 cooking oils
okay here's a nice new slide showing
here's a normal cell here's a cancer
cell a normal cell takes its glucose
converts it into pyruvate through
glycolysis runs it through the
mitochondria Krebs cycle and then
electron transport oxfast makes tons of
ATP you know like we're saying anywhere
from 30 to 38 ATP per glucose the reason
it's a little variable how much ATP you
get is sometimes some of that energy is
used for other things for generating
heat for uh pumping uh other molecules
across the mitochondrial membrane all
right well anyways then you produce a
little bit of protein a little bit of
nucleic acids a little bit of
carbohydrate and lipids all right now
here's a cancer cell first of all
glucose is in giant big letters because
they use up to like a hundred times as
much glucose as a regular cell then it
goes to pyruvate and then the pyruvate
is metabolized anaerobically it gets
converted into lactate lactate lets it
regenerate NAD so you can keep running
glycolysis the lactic acids pumped out
into the extracellular Matrix and that
acidifies the space around the cancer
cell and that also impairs immune
function cells around it and it gives it
a competitive advantage over the cells
adjacent to it so the cancer cells
controlling its its outer milieu the
tumor milieu extracellular environment
to its own advantage of course and it
has to make tons of protein because it
has to replicate itself it has to double
everything it has the human genome has
3.3 billion that's b as in billion base
pairs and it has to be a copy on each
side of those base pairs so you're
talking about you've got to make 6.6
billion nucleic acids that's a ton of
nucleic acids nucleic acids are made out
of sugar running through the pentose
phosphate shunt pathway and they're also
made out of amino acids to construct the
nucleotide bases you need a source of
nitrogen so the point is they have to be
a synthetic machine uh to crank out
that's the rate limiting step in cell
replication is is is making a copy of
all the the DNA okay and so then some of
the RNA stuff so it takes time and it
takes tons of substrate the other thing
that contributes a lot to making these
uh building blocks for macromolecule
synthesis is glutamine glutamine is the
most common amino acid and that's one of
the reasons why I know T colon Campbell
says as long as you lower animal protein
you're good to go but it seems wise to
me you might want to lower your overall
protein a little bit okay and that comes
out of the data James Mitchell PhD
research and whatnot and it just seems
right to me am I 100 sure that no I'm
not but that seems a little wise to me
because glutamine is a major source for
these macromolecules
um and then rodents uh protein
restrictions there's reasons to think
that it might be beneficial okay
um
this paper was the landscape of cancer
genes and mutational processes in breast
cancer oh this is just one part of the
data from The genome Atlas project so
those are like the DNA base pairs tgca
The genome the cancer genome Atlas
project and it showed they were
expecting it would show all these
characteristic mutations for each type
of cancer and they can specifically use
those mutations to Target the protein
made by that Gene and treat that
individual cancer but it was bogus it
didn't work okay the gentleman Atlas
project showed a bewildering array of a
large variety of random mutations okay
and the reason is the cancer happens
first due to injury to the mitochondria
most commonly from hypoxia also due to
some carcinogens or mutagens that injure
the mitochondria and once the
mitochondria is injured you don't have
enough energy to maintain all your DNA
enzyme repair systems and you start
getting more mutations so that's why you
will have a lot of mutations in a cancer
but you will not it's not the for it's
not the beginning part of it and that's
why there's not a characteristic path
pattern they couldn't find any
significant characteristic patterns in
the general Atlas product it was a big
shock to the people who'd sort of been
trained only in the genetic theory the
somatic mutation Theory
and so this was actually a big deal in
the history cancer research and I think
this guy Travis Kristofferson he did an
excellent job of describing that uh
tripping on the truth Travis
Kristofferson he's got videos online if
you want to watch his videos he's good I
mean I like him he's a smart guy and
he's good with his basic biochemistry
But the spot where he screws up is he's
sort of friends who I think with Thomas
seifried and Thomas seifried and him
they're both Smart Guys and they've both
done something really good for cancer
patients by developing understanding of
the metabolic theory of cancer however I
think they're both screwing up in that
they promote the ketogenic diet and like
why How could somebody prevent promote
something as stupid as a ketogenic diet
and in my opinion the reason they do
that is because
they're narrow you're going to see most
doctors most phds in my experience
they're really knowledgeable about their
own tight-specific field but it's very
few that have read extensively outside
their narrow field so they might know a
tremendous amount about their one
particular area but be absolute moronic
idiots about nutrition about other
aspects of cancer and biochemistry for
example and that's what I think is
happening here because you know T Colin
Campbell the number one thing that
causes cancer is eating meat and so
here's these guys saying eat meat for
cancer that's entirely stupid I think
that guy T Colin Campbell is brilliant
on the subject of animal protein he's
the best in the world all right
um
so anyways so that's the the general
Atlas product you need to know that
because people are going to tell you
you're going to open up a book and it'll
say cancer is genetic disease BS it's a
metabolic disease that's an important
point it's a metabolic disease not a
genetic disease and there's tons of data
to support that statement and if you
don't get that you'll have a hard time
getting anything else so you need to
understand that read about it on your
own you'll see read the genetic theory
go online watch the videos of Thomas
seifried and of um Travis Christopherson
here and then start reading more about
it read about fireberg it'll it'll
become pretty obvious it'll make sense
okay so this is some work from Thomas
seifried so here's ciphery this is his
book cancer is a metabolic disease from
2012. and here's this beautiful study
that he is explaining so here's a normal
cell it divides and here's the daughter
cells and the circle thing here is the
nucleus the little round things that
look like a peanut those are
mitochondria and then the fluid around
the mitochondria that's the cytoplasm
okay so if you have a cancer cell it
divides it makes two more cancer cells
but what they did was very clever they
did what are called cell transfer
experiments so what they did here is
they took the nucleus and they took the
nucleus of a cancer cell and they put it
into a normal cell and they wanted to
see what happens that cell divides no
cancer okay that's an important Point
whatever was causing cancer it's not in
the nucleus it's not in the DNA
therefore it is not caused by a mutation
whereas when they took the cytoplasm of
the cancer cell meaning the fluid in
here as well as the mitochondria and
they transplanted that a normal nucleus
into that
they got cancer and virtually almost
every single cell so the point was the
controlling substance that was causing
the cancer was whatever was in the
cytoplasm in the mitochondria and it's
the mitochondrial failure all right the
cell can't make energy it's either going
to die going into apoptosis or it's
going to transform itself into becoming
like an anaerobic bacteria so this is of
tremendous important this is supporting
data from the metabolic theory of cancer
which is the only theory that makes
sense okay
and you ask yourself well why do I think
this is such a big deal because if I had
known this you know 25 years ago I might
have been able to save my mother's life
30 years ago I wish I had known this uh
but I didn't
um and you know this was being worked on
in the 1970s varberg did his working on
the Nobel Prize in 1931 it pisses me off
that nobody told me this and I know why
nobody told me this because no one knew
it
um and I like I said I knew the
oncologist who took care of my mom they
the they loved her they were friends
with my mom they did the best they could
and I and I and she lived she lived 11
years instead of only living two or
three which was the initial you know
prediction prognosis so anyways just
once again here is the money hexokinase
2 is up regulated meaning tons more of
it is made so the cancer cell like a
vacuum can suck in more glucose from the
blood and it's in the perfect location
there's still a little bit of ATP being
made by the mitochondria so not all the
mitochondria in the cell are destroyed
typical cell will have you know let's
say hundreds even thousands of
mitochondria and some of them still work
at least a little bit they are abnormal
if you look at the mitochondria in the
cells with an electron microscope
they'll be much fewer in number let's
say half as many as usual they'll be
abnormal abnormally small all abnormally
deformed in shape having like these big
empty spaces inside of them rather than
the typical cristae
um convoluted membrane and whatnot
but this is the money thing this is the
most important thing you can get from
this talk is cancer is a metabolic
disease and the essential uh change in
gene transcription is hexokinase II
being upregulated binding to the
mitochondria to prevent apoptosis
because it's a mitochondria splits open
releases cytochrome C and that activates
a whole pathway of apoptosis program
cell death this does not let that happen
it blocks backs backs is this Protein
that's part of the Cascade of events in
mitochondrial directed apoptosis program
cell death of a cell
okay so here's the book again tripping
over the truth by Travis Christopherson
copyright 2017 and it's a good book he
explains things clear he's nice I like
him his talks are good I like the guy
but I think he doesn't know enough about
nutrition that's why he recommends keto
diet which I think is ignorant okay the
general Atlas project we talked about
the mutation pattern was chaotic and
random nothing could be derived from it
intelligent or meaningful Peter Peterson
is This brilliant American scientist who
figured out that hexokinase II
upregulation was the key change in gene
transcription characteristic of
essentially all cancers you know maybe
there's an exception to that I'm not
sure I'm not aware of it but there might
be but as far as I know that's in all of
them and what does that mean well if all
of them have a metabolic cause maybe all
of them benefit from metabolic treatment
you see how fantastically useful that is
trust me that's big news okay that's an
AO academic orgasm all right
um
let's see hypoxia causes a power failure
in the mitochondria and then uh as
Travis Christopherson says it's like
turning on the backup generators or
we're going to die that the cell then
runs on anaerobic glycolysis
um it also starts sucking up glutamine
as well as sucking up glucose
um and so the whole point is the DNA
mutations are a sequelae of cell
transformation
and they are not the cause of it and
virtually every Cancer cell had hk2
hexokinase 2 attached to the
mitochondria membrane and vdac to
preventing apoptosis and again this
implies that almost all cancers are
likely to benefit from metabolic
treatments that is so important it is
not even funny that is like a
life-changing thing this could be the
difference between dead and six months
and Alive 30 years later implies that
almost all cancers are likely to benefit
from metabolic treatments I'll say that
one more time cancer according to all
this research appears to be a metabolic
disease and this implies that almost all
cancers are likely to benefit from
metabolic treatments
that is an incredibly useful thing if
that's all you learn in the next six
months you'll have learned a lot that is
such a big thing I could have saved my
mother's life if I had known that
okay Otto varberg you know he was a
great biochemist from Germany won the
Nobel Prize 1931. people think he was
the greatest biochemist of the entire
1900s According to some
and he's the one who figured out in
tissue culture
um a couple hours of deprivation of
oxygen and he could transform cells into
cancer and that that was in his opinion
he's we think he's right the primary
cause of cancer and everything else
indirectly somehow channeled into
causing mitochondrial injury a most
commonly hypoxia
um and he you know according to think
different things I've read some say the
cancerous
mitochondria are only making a residual
of about five percent of the energy
production the running Krebs cycle
usually a lot of times Krebs cycle is
running backwards but okay uh and Robert
he understood this he said hey if you
want to keep the cell healthy you need
to keep up the speed of the blood yeah
you don't want this Blood sludge slow
blood flow
um
uh cancer cells also shed a lot of uh
when they get to be a centimeter in size
or bigger they'll shed a lot of cancer
cells into the blood so you need a good
functioning immune system to remove
those that's why you want to do a lot of
things
um
that'll optimize your immune system
function fruits are very low on methion
and we talked about methionine
restriction in a previous lecture
it's a useful topic as well
okay we're finishing up here this is the
last slide
oh actually I think I got one more slide
after this I'm not sure but I think I'm
just about done anyways uh what about
cancer among you yeah there's a cancer
when you I'll talk about this in some
other talk but as Travis Kristofferson
describes it in his tripping over the
truth Book hexokinase 2 is the major
transformative change up regulation of
that enzyme that enables cancer cells to
suck more glucose into the cell and
that's how they get their energy from
um
let's see
oh another thing that happens because
the cell is running on anaerobic
metabolism it's not running Krebs cycle
in a forward Direction it's not popping
out all that CO2 because remember in
Krebs cycle you pop out a lot of CO2 as
you decarboxylate those intermediates
well guess what that CO2 causes
vasocilitation so that lack of
generating co2s leads to a lack of
dilating the arteries leads to a lack of
oxygen and you get a prolonged increased
hypoxic oxygen depleted tumor milieu and
that favors the cancer over the
surrounding cells so the surrounding
cells are screwed the Cancer's sucking
up all the iron so they're iron depleted
they can't function well it's sucking up
all the glucose so they don't get enough
glucose energy and it's pumping out
lactic acid on top of them which also
impairs their function and impairs
immune system function so this cancer
cell is not one little change it's a
giant massive series of steps to allow
itself to function like an
anaerobacteria to grow in location and
then to spread outward okay
foreign
so we talked about the somatic mutation
Theory which I think is totally
overrated and I think it's essentially
been refuted especially by The genome
Atlas project and also by those uh cell
transfer experiments where they move the
mitochondria versus moving the cell
nucleus
Etc and the random pattern of mutations
Etc so tripping over the truth has a lot
of discussion of it and very good and
that's also why I think there has been
some initial improvements you know in
cancer treatment with the surgeries and
with the chemotherapy but nowhere near
as much has been hoped and I think it's
because they'll need to start working
with the metabolic Theory and there's a
lot of things that they can do
um and like repurpose drugs I think
that's been underutilized a combination
of uh whatever other treatment is done
with optimal nutrition and all these
other things we've talked about the
trophoblast theory of cancer was
popularized by Nicholas Gonzalez and he
is a bright guy and he did have some
some clever things to say when you rise
but he also says some stuff that I
thought was BS he sort of went down this
path of recommending a meat diet for
some patients not for other patients you
know this whole diet type based on your
personality I thought that was all BS so
I kind of lost a little bit of respect
for his uh ideas when he started going
on that path
but you know I'll I'll read a whole
bunch of authors even if I totally
disagree with them if they seem
intelligent and they have a few good
things to say I'll read the book but you
know I'm not going to buy into a lot of
other things he says infection
inflammation theory of cancer we talked
about that how that ends up being yes
there can be some genetic things
happening with the virus but it also
ends up going down the path of
inflammation ischemia hypoxia metabolic
theory of cancer by viralberg that's the
best that opens up everything in cancer
thought and study and this Peter
Peterson guy he's the American scientist
Danish Roots he was a student of Albert
leninger and that's where you see great
scientists coming out in this verse you
know the whole varburg school leading to
you know crabs ebden Meyerhoff and
whatnot and then the whole school of
leninger I like lenninger of all the
biochemistry books it to me seems the
one that has the best attitude don't get
me wrong there's a lot of good pictures
in the other ones but I like lenninger's
attitude he has respect for the history
and stuff more than the other ones do
that's good okay okay are we talking
about hqa2 hexokinase 2 sorry about the
dog
um let's see uh typically the the other
cells the cancer cells at only 50 as
many mitochondria and they're all
abnormal in shape okay
um so the teaching point is everybody's
got some cells that have been initiated
the first step of cancer in their body
the immune system hopefully has removed
them perhaps not perhaps they're sitting
around dormant so just keep yourselves
well oxygenated you'll probably never
progress to a clinically symptomatic
cancer and we've already been through
this plenty of times low fat low sodium
Whole Food vegan diet no meat no sweet
no oil no caffeine and have a strong
immune system get your exercise get that
a lymphatic flow going try to have
positive social relationships
um
have a strong purpose in life you know
let's say to help your kid to help some
good cause to help other people whatever
it might be uh help others
and so I hope that helps